# MicroPython driver for SSD1306 OLED displays.

**Taken from https://github.com/adafruit/micropython-adafruit-ssd1306**

This library has been deprecated! See original README for details.
Check out original library from Adafruit here:</BR>
https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_SSD1306


This driver is based on the SSD1306 driver in the MicroPython source but differs by supporting hardware I2C interfaces (like on the SAMD21 MicroPython port). Added `get_fb()` method, modified `poweroff()` and `poweron()` methods to `on()`, `off()` and `reset()` methods.

### Installation
Copy the `lib/ssd1306.mpy` file to the `lib` directory of MCU with MicroPython.

### Usage
```python
from machine import Pin, I2C
import ssd1306

i2c = I2C(0, scl=Pin(4), sda=Pin(5), freq=10000)
display = ssd1306.SSD1306_I2C(128, 64, i2c)
display.fill(0)
display.text("Hello World!", 0, 0, 1)
display.show()
```

### Methods
Constructors:

* `ssd1306.SSD1306_I2C(width, height, i2c, addr=0x3c, external_vcc=False)`
* `ssd1306.SSD1306_SPI(width, height, spi, dc, res, cs, external_vcc=False)`

Constructor creates a framebuffer with the given width and height. Use `get_fb()` to get the framebuffer.

Basic methods:
* `init_display()` - initializes the display registers
* `get_size()` - returns `(width, height)`
* `off()` - turns off the display
* `on()` - turns on the display
* `contrast(contrast)` - sets the contrast (0xFF is maximal contrast)
* `invert(invert)` - inverts the display (0 = normal, 1 = inverted)
* `show()` - writes the buffer to the display
* `get_fb()` - returns the framebuffer

Framebuffer methods:
* `fill(col)` - clears the display buffer to the given color (0 = black, 1 = white)
* `pixel(x, y, col)` - sets a single pixel (0 = black, 1 = white)
* `scroll(dx, dy)` - scrolls the display buffer by `dx` and `dy` pixels ()
* `text(string, x, y, col=1)`

Method of child class (SSD1306_I2C and SSD1306_SPI), all for internal use:
* `write_cmd(cmd)` - writes a command to the display
* `write_framebuf()` - writes the framebuffer to the display
* `reset()` - resets the display by `res` pin (only SPI implementation)
